More advanced custom function tutorial (#1108)
handsontable/hyperformula: docs/guide/custom-functions.md

```js
import { FunctionPlugin } from 'hyperformula';

// let's call the function plugin `MyCustomPlugin`
export class MyCustomPlugin extends FunctionPlugin {
  
}
```

### 2. Define your function's ID, method, and metadata

In your function plugin, in the static `implementedFunctions` property, define an object that declares the functions provided by this plugin.

The name of that object becomes the ID by which [translations](#function-name-translations), [aliases](#function-aliases), and other elements refer to your function.
Make the ID unique among all HyperFormula functions ([built-in](built-in-functions.md#list-of-available-functions) and custom).

In your function's object, you can specify:
- a `method` property (required), which maps your function to the implementation method (we'll define it later on),
- a `parameters` array that describes the arguments accepted by your function and [validation options](#argument-validation-options) for each argument,
- other [custom function options](#custom-function-options).

```js
MyCustomPlugin.implementedFunctions = {
  // let's define the function's ID as `GREET`
  GREET: {
    method: "greet",
    parameters: [

>       { argumentType: "STRING" }

Reviewer: In TS, the string literal does not work. It must be `FunctionArgumentType.STRING`. 

I think it should either be explained here or fixed in the types.

Author: Generally, for TS devs we should create separate example/demo/code snippet and describe the exported enums & interfaces, but I think it's out of the scope of this task so I wrote everything with plan JS in mind.

Author: You're right, once `FunctionArgumentType` is exported it can be used here. I'll change it.

Author: done

## Add a custom function

> As an example, let's create a function that accepts a username as a string argument and returns a personalized greeting. 

Author: changed

```javascript
import { FunctionPlugin } from 'hyperformula';

// let's call the function plugin `GreetingsPlugin`
export class GreetingsPlugin extends FunctionPlugin {
  
}
```

### 2. Define your function's ID, method and metadata

In your function plugin, in the static `implementedFunctions` property, define an object that declares the functions provided by this plugin.

The name of that object becomes the ID by which [translations](#function-translations), [aliases](#function-aliases), and other elements refer to your function.
Make the ID unique among all HyperFormula functions ([built-in](built-in-functions.md#list-of-available-functions) and custom).

In your function's object, you can specify:
- a `method` property (required), which maps your function to an implementation method (we'll define it later on),

> - an `parameters` array that describes the arguments accepted by your function and [validation options](#argument-validation-options) for each argument,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- a `parameters` array that describes the arguments accepted by your function and [validation options](#argument-validation-options) for each argument,
```

Author: fixed

> :::

Reviewer: The text above this line contains too many repetitions with the section "Function name translations". Can you shorten the text and put a link to the section "Function name translations" for details?

Also the section "Localizing custom functions" on the page `localizing-functions.md` repeats the same information in a very vague way. It would be good to replace the information on that page with a link to the "Function name translations" section as well.

Author: Good point. I reduced the section `3. Add your function's names` to the bare minimum and added a reference to the section `Function name translations`. Also `localizing-functions` guide now redirects users to `custom-functions` guide instead of duplicating the content

Use the [`registerFunctionPlugin()`](../api/classes/hyperformula.md#registerfunctionplugin) method:

```js
HyperFormula.registerFunctionPlugin(MyCustomPlugin, MyCustomPlugin.translations);
```

### 6. Use your custom function inside a formula

Now, you can use your GREET function inside a formula:

```js
// prepare spreadsheet data
const data = [['Anthony', '=GREET(A1)']];

// build a HyperFormula instance where you can use your function directly
const hfInstance = HyperFormula.buildFromArray(data);

// read the value of cell A1
const result = hfInstance.getCellValue({ sheet: 0, col: 1, row: 0 });

// open the browser's console to see the results
console.log(result);
```

### Full example

The complete implementation of this custom function is also included in the [demo](#working-demo).

```js

> import { FunctionPlugin, CellError } from 'hyperformula';

Reviewer: `CellError` was not used up to this point, so it looks excessive. However, I think that a simple cell error should be added to the snippet in point "4. Implement your function's logic"

Author: Initially, I had a simple error-handling example in the implementation of `GREET`, but I removed it to keep the first part of the tutorial simple. Error handling is presented in the `Advanced custom function example` section. Do you think, the first part should also contain an example of `return new CellError(...);`?

Reviewer: I think yes, since it is only three lines more. It teaches something interesting about the type handling

Author: Done

export class MyCustomPlugin extends FunctionPlugin {
  greet(ast, state) {
    return this.runFunction(
      ast.args,
      state,
      this.metadata('GREET'),
      (firstName) => {
        return `👋 Hello, ${firstName}!`;
      },
    );
  }
}

> MyCustomPlugin.implementedFunctions = {

Reviewer: This line does not compile in TypeScript with the following error:

```
index.ts:23:16 - error TS2339: Property 'translations' does not exist on type 'typeof MyCustomPlugin'.

23 MyCustomPlugin.translations = {
```

The workaround is to add it as a filed in the class:

```
public static translations;
```

I think that you either need to refactor the snippet to define translations outside of this class, or add an optional field `translations` to `FunctionPlugin`

Author: In TS I would do:

```Typescript
export class MyCustomPlugin extends FunctionPlugin {
  static translations = {
    // ...
  }
```

but in plain JS it throws an error when run inside CodeSandbox:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2480086/208121884-1b080608-291a-4a7c-8fa2-43808a2a352d.png)

So I decided to keep it like this. Unless you know how to enable this "experimental syntax" in CodeSandbox ;)

Reviewer: But do translations need to be provided as the static property of `MyCustomPlugin`? 

- If yes, then they should be added to the typings and my previous comment will be resolved.
- If not, then we will make these guides clearer, if we provide the translations as a separate object (e.g. `MyCustomPluginTranslations`).

Author: > But do translations need to be provided as the static property of MyCustomPlugin?

No, they could be a separate object. I get your point. You're right, that making it a member of the Plugin class overcomplicated the example. I'll change it.

Author: done

  GREET: {
    method: 'greet',
    parameters: [
      { argumentType: 'STRING' }
    ],
  }
};

MyCustomPlugin.translations = {
  enGB: {
    GREET: 'GREET',
  },
  enUS: {
    GREET: 'GREET',
  }
};

HyperFormula.registerFunctionPlugin(MyCustomPlugin, MyCustomPlugin.translations);
```

## Advanced custom function example

In a more advanced example, we'll create a custom function `DOUBLE_RANGE` that takes a range of numbers and returns the range of the same size with all the numbers doubled.

> ### Accept a range argument

Author: You're right. Elaborating more on various argument types would be helpful to a developer of the custom functions. I'll create a follow-up task to do that.

> ### Accept a range argument

Author: #1123

To accept a range argument, declare it in the `parameters` array:

```js
MyCustomPlugin.implementedFunctions = {
  DOUBLE_RANGE: {
    method: 'doubleRange',
    parameters: [
      { argumentType: 'RANGE' },
    ],
  }
};
```

The range arguments are passed to the implementation method as instances of the [`SimpleRangeValue` class](../api/classes/simplerangevalue.md):

```js
export class MyCustomPlugin extends FunctionPlugin {
  doubleRange(ast, state) {
    return this.runFunction(
      ast.args,
      state,
      this.metadata('DOUBLE_RANGE'),
      (range) => {
        const rangeData = range.data;
        // ...
      },
    );
  }
}
```

> ### Return an array of data

Author: Not exactly. The arrays guide describes the array concept in hyperformula, but it does not cover the topic of returning arrays from (custom) functions. Nevertheless, I linked it to the `Return an array of data` section of the Custom functions guide.

A function may return multiple values in the form of an array. To do that, use [`SimpleRangeValue` class](../api/classes/simplerangevalue.md):

```js
export class MyCustomPlugin extends FunctionPlugin {
  doubleRange(ast, state) {
    return this.runFunction(
      ast.args,
      state,
      this.metadata('DOUBLE_RANGE'),
      (range) => {

>         const resultArray = //...

Reviewer: Is it on purpose that the body of the function is omitted?

Author: Yes, this snippet demonstrates usage of `SimpleRangeValue` to return an array

Author: In my opinion it would unnecessarily increase the complexity of the guide. A reader can see the fully working example in the demo section if interested in the details.

>         return SimpleRangeValue.onlyValues(resultArray);

Author: It's a valid question. I'll create a follow-up task to elaborate on that.

>         return SimpleRangeValue.onlyValues(resultArray);

Author: https://github.com/handsontable/hyperformula/issues/1123

      },
    );
  }
}
```

You also need to provide the `arraySizeMethod` that calculates the size of the result array based on the function arguments and returns an instance of the [`ArraySize` class](../api/classes/arraysize.md).

::: tip
If you don't define the `arraySizeMethod`, returning an array will cause the `#VALUE!` error.

> :::

Author: Changed

```js
export class MyCustomPlugin extends FunctionPlugin {
  doubleRangeResultArraySize(ast, state) {
    const arg = ast?.args?.[0];

    if (arg?.start == null || arg?.end == null) {
      return ArraySize.scalar();
    }

    const width = arg.end.col - arg.start.col + 1;
    const height = arg.end.row - arg.start.row + 1;

    return new ArraySize(width, height);
  }
}

MyCustomPlugin.implementedFunctions = {
  DOUBLE_RANGE: {
    method: 'doubleRange',
    arraySizeMethod: 'doubleRangeResultArraySize',
    parameters: [
      { argumentType: 'RANGE' },
    ],
  }
};
```

### Validate the arguments and return an error

> To handle invalid inputs, the custom function should return an instance of the [`CellError` class](../api/classes/cellerror.md) with the relevant [error type](types-of-errors.md).

Author: I'll create a follow-up task to elaborate on that.

> To handle invalid inputs, the custom function should return an instance of the [`CellError` class](../api/classes/cellerror.md) with the relevant [error type](types-of-errors.md).

Author: https://github.com/handsontable/hyperformula/issues/1123

```

### 6. Use your custom function inside a formula

Now, you can use your GREET function inside a formula:

```javascript
// prepare spreadsheet data
const data = [['Anthony', '=GREET(A1)']];

// build a HyperFormula instance where you can use your function directly
const hfInstance = HyperFormula.buildFromArray(data);

// read the value of cell A1
const result = hfInstance.getCellValue({ sheet: 0, col: 1, row: 0 });

// open the browser's console to see the results
console.log(result);
```

### Full example

```js
import { FunctionPlugin, CellError } from 'hyperformula';

export class GreetingsPlugin extends FunctionPlugin {
  greet(ast, state) {
    return this.runFunction(
      ast.args,
      state,
      this.metadata("GREET"),
      (username) => {
        if (!username) {
          return new CellError('VALUE');
        }

        return `👋 Hello, ${username}!`;
      },
    );
  }
}

GreetingsPlugin.implementedFunctions = {
  GREET: {
    method: "greet",
    parameters: [
      { argumentType: "STRING" }
    ],
  }
};

GreetingsPlugin.translations = {
  enGB: {
    GREET: "GREET",
  },
  enUS: {
    GREET: "GREET",

>   }

Author: added a comment to the code snippet as suggested

};

HyperFormula.registerFunctionPlugin(GreetingsPlugin, GreetingsPlugin.translations);
```

### Test your function

> You may add some unit tests to make sure that your custom function works correctly using one of the javascript testing libraries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may add some unit tests to make sure that your custom function works correctly using one of the JavaScript testing libraries.
```

Author: changed

```js
describe('GreetingsPlugin', () => {
  it('works for a non-empty string', () => {
    HyperFormula.registerFunctionPlugin(GreetingsPlugin, GreetingsPlugin.translations);
    const engine = HyperFormula.buildFromArray([['Anthony', '=GREET(A1)']], { licenseKey: 'gpl-v3' });
    expect(engine.getCellValue({ sheet: 0, row: 0, col: 1 })).toEqual('👋 Hello, Anthony!');
  });

  it('returns #VALUE! error for empty string', () => {
    HyperFormula.registerFunctionPlugin(GreetingsPlugin, GreetingsPlugin.translations);
    const engine = HyperFormula.buildFromArray([['', '=GREET(A1)']], { licenseKey: 'gpl-v3' });
    expect(engine.getCellValueType({ sheet: 0, row: 0, col: 1 })).toEqual('ERROR');
    expect(engine.getCellValue({ sheet: 0, row: 0, col: 1 }).value).toEqual('#VALUE!');
  });
});
```

## Custom function options

You can set the following options for your function:

> | Option                              | Type    | Description                                                                                                                                  |

Author: added

|-------------------------------------|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `method` (required)                 | String  | Name of the method that implements the custom function logic.                                                                                |
| `parameters`                        | Array   | Specification of the arguments accepted by the function and their [validation options](#argument-validation-options).                        |
| `repeatLastArgs`                    | Number  | For functions with a variable number of arguments: sets how many last arguments can be repeated indefinitely.                                |
| `expandRanges`                      | Boolean | `true`: ranges in the function's arguments are inlined to (possibly multiple) scalar arguments.                                              |

> | `returnNumberType`                  | String  | Function return type.                                                                                                                        |

Reviewer: A list of possible values would be nice.

Author: Added

> | `arraySizeMethod`                   | ?       | ?                                                                                                                                            |

Reviewer: TODO :)

Author: done

| `isVolatile`                        | Boolean | `true`: the function is [volatile](volatile-functions.md).                                                                                   |
| `isDependentOnSheetStructureChange` | Boolean | `true`: the function gets recalculated with each sheet shape change (e.g., when adding/removing rows or columns).                            |
| `doesNotNeedArgumentsToBeComputed`  | Boolean | `true`: the function treats reference or range arguments as arguments that don't create dependency (other arguments are properly evaluated). |
| `arrayFunction`                     | Boolean | `true`: the function enables the [array arithmetic mode](arrays.md) in its arguments and nested expressions.                                 |

> | `vectorizationForbidden`            | Boolean | `true`: the function will never get vectorized.                                                                                              |

Reviewer: Can you explain what it means to vectorize a function? This concept is not present in the docs.

Author: https://hyperformula.handsontable.com/guide/arrays.html#passing-arrays-to-scalar-functions

Author: But it's hard to find indeed (the vuepress search looks only at the headlines). We might rephrase that a little and link that section to the custom-functions guide. WDYT?

Reviewer: Yes, that would be fine.

Author: Done

> In your function plugin, in the static `implementedFunctions` property, add your function's options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The options listed above are set in the static `implementedFunctions` property of your function plugin:
```

};
```

### Argument validation options

You can set the following argument validation options:

| Option                    | Type                                     | Description                                                                                                                                                                                                                      |
|---------------------------|------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | `argumentType` (required) | String                                   | Expected type of the argument.                                                                                                                                                                                                   |

Author: Added "Possible values"

| `maxValue`                | Number                                   | If set: numerical arguments need to be less than or equal to `maxValue`.                                                                                                                                                         |
| `lessThan`                | Number                                   | If set: numerical argument need to be less than `lessThan`.                                                                                                                                                                      |
| `greaterThan`             | Number                                   | If set: numerical argument need to be greater than `greaterThan`.                                                                                                                                                                |

> In your function plugin, in the static `implementedFunctions` property, next to other options add an array called `parameters`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In your function plugin, in the static `implementedFunctions` property, add an array called `parameters`:
```

Author: changed
